# PopulationAbundance function

## Abstract

The purpose of this BEP is to add populationAbundance(TAX:<taxon_id>) or pop(TAX:<taxon_id>) to the BEL Language. 

A populationAbundance function would allow biologists and toxicologists to capture population changes in a taxon, e.g., a species, subspecies, or phylum. There is currently no way to capture this information using BEL 2.0.0. This would be especially useful in microbiome work.

## Preamble

BEP-Id: BEP0001

Status: Draft

Version: 1

Authors: William Hayes (whayes@biodati.com)

Created-Date: 2018-04-23

Type: Standards Track

BEL-Version: 2.0.0+

## Rationale and Goals

Population abundance is not currently captured by the BEL Language. In order to support microbiome and environmental biologist, BEL needs the ability to describe effects on entire populations of organisms.

## Use Cases

Adding a populationAbundance() function would allow capturing population level changes due to environment or treatments. 

    # Penicillin decreases the population of Streptococcus entericus
    a(CHEBI:penicillin) decreases pop(TAX:1123302) 
  
    # California Mule Deer increases population of gray wolves
    pop(TAX:598490) increases pop(TAX:9612)
  
    # Firmicutes bacteria increases obesity
    pop(TAX:1239) increases path(MESH:Obesity)
 
## Discussion

* Should we use this for cell populations as well? E.g., (PMID 19404966) "The number of Th17 cells increased during SLE flare". Is there a need for distinct entity types for populations of cells and taxonomic groups, i.e., different needs for modifying functions?
* Similar to other BEL abundance types, should the loc() modifier apply? E.g., pop(TAX:"Demodex folliculorum", loc(UBERON:"hair follicle"))
* Almost all other BEL abundance types can participate in complexes. Should pop() participate in complexes? Or do we need a new entity or relationship to represent physical interactions between populations and/or populations and other abundances?How should symbiotic or parasitic relationships be represented?

## Specification

The new language feature is:

  populationAbundance(<Taxon>)
  pop(<Taxon>)
  
  Species is currently supported by the BEL.bio API using the NCBI Taxonomy (TAX) namespace.

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposed feature is for 2.0.0+ and will be added to the language so does not require any efforts to migrate older BEL knowledge.

## Reference Implementation

The reference implementation will target the next minor point release of the BEL language after approval (e.g. 2.1.0) and will consist of adding the populationAbundance() function to the BEL Specification yaml file.

    functions:
      info:
        populationAbundance:
          type: primary
          abbreviation: pop
          categories:
          - abundance
          description: Denotes the abundance of a taxon.     
          name: populationAbundance
      signatures:
        populationAbundance:
          func_type: primary
          name: populationAbundance
            signatures:
              - arguments:
                - type: NSArg
                  position: 1
                  values:
                  - Species
                - optional: true
                  type: Modifier
                  values:
                  - location
    
