# Namespace Placeholder: TBD

## Abstract

Provide a standard Namespace prefix for terms not currently available for any
namespace allows users to use a placeholder namespace value that BEL tools can
automatically provide replacements as they become available in the supported
terminologies.

## Preamble

BEP-Id: BEP-0002

Status: Draft

Version: 1

BEL-Version: 2.0.0

Authors: William Hayes (whayes@biodati.com)

Created-Date: 2018-06-08

Type: Process

## Rationale and Goals

Encourage the use of a placeholder namespace prefix when the term does not exist
in any of the supported namespaces.  This is to mitigate the number of private
namespaces needed and often created when a term does not exist in a public and parallel
namespace.  For example, Selventa created several namespaces to accommodate new terms
and concepts that were parallel to available namespaces - e.g. SDIS (Selventa Disease)  vs DO
(Disease Ontology).

With a standard namespace prefix for a term, we can find cases where a term
is not based on a current namespace and evaluate the available namespaces for a
match when that term/concept is added to the namespace and then propose the
replacement to the user.

## Use Cases

User tries to add a term into a BEL Assertion (e.g. p(*newterm*)).  When not found
in the available namespaces, the term is entered as p(TBD:*newterm*). The BEL assertion
is evaluated periodically to see if a match is found in any of the Protein namespaces
since the TBD:*newterm* (*newterm* is just a generic name for any term that is added)
is used in a protein context.  A match to the *newterm* in a non-protein context
would not be considered a match.

In a BEL Nanopub editing environment, the TBD:*newterm* could be presented if no
other matches are available.  The editing environment could periodically evaluate
all of the TBD:newterm1, TDB:newterm2, ... namespace values against the appropriate
context namespace values to see if any matches are available. If a match is available,
the match could be presented via a notification to the creator or curator of the
nanopubs using the TDB:*newterm* namespace value to permit replacement.

## Discussion

Best practice would be for the user adding a TBD:*newterm* to propose adding that concept
to the parent ontology or terminology associated with the relevant namespace.

Questions from Natalie Catlett:

* What happens when a curator enters a TBD term that has a strange BEL function/type?

* Will it get fixed in TBD after someone reviews/edits the original nanopub?

* What if TBD terms are entered with misspellings?

Questions from Charlie Hoyt:

* If we were to agree to set using TBD as the namespace keyword for "placeholder" namespaces, how would this look in BEL Script? Even if BEL.bio won't support BEL Script as a first class citizen, we haven't officially deprecated or decommissioned it and other tools will have to cope with entities that won't be backed by a namespace. Logically, I don't think this is a big problem, but it might be from the technical implementation side.


## Specification

This does not require any changes to the BEL Specification.  BEL documentation would
need to be updated to officially recognize TBD as a namespace prefix used for this
purpose.

## Backwards Compatibility

There are no backwards compatibility issues associated with this BEP.

## Reference Implementation

Not required for this BEP.
