# Definition of Namespaces and Annotations with MIRIAM

## Abstract

This BEP proposes additional syntax (e.g., `DEFINE NAMESPACE HGNC AS MIRIAM`) for defining a namespace or annotation by regular expression via a lookup to its entry in the MIRIAM database.

## Preamble

BEP-Id: BEP-0009

Status: Draft

Version: 1

BEL-Version: 2.0.0+

Authors: Charles Tapley Hoyt (charles.hoyt@scai.fraunhofer.de)

Created-Date: 2019-08-01

Type: Standards Track

## Rationale and Goals

The BEL 2.0 standard already allowed annotations to be defined as a `PATTERN` (i.e., regular expression).
Following the acceptance of [BEP-0005](https://github.com/belbio/bep/blob/master/docs/published/BEP-0005.md), BEL 2.1 allowed namespaces to be defined the same way.

The MIRIAM database compiles the common databases and namespaces as well as the regular expression corresponding to valid identifiers in each.
The goal of this BEP is to make use of the MIRIAM database to make definition of namespaces by regular expression more standard and more easy.

BEL frameworks can access the MIRIAM database through its API (e.g., https://registry.api.identifiers.org/restApi/namespaces/search/findByPrefix?prefix=hgnc) to look up the appropriate regular expression which will then be handled the same as any namespace defined by a regular expression.

## Use Cases

Instead of defining the HGNC namespace using a regular expression like the following

`DEFINE NAMESPACE HGNC AS PATTERN "^((HGNC|hgnc):)?\\d{1,5}$"`

the proposed syntax would allow users to defer the lookup of the pattern to MIRIAM with

`DEFINE NAMESPACE HGNC AS MIRIAM`.

## Discussion

- @cthoyt what happens when the MIRIAM prefix for a namespace contains characters that are not allowed in a BEL keyword, such as the dash character that appears in [`ec-code`](https://registry.identifiers.org/registry/ec-code) or the dot character that appears in [`pubchem.compound`](https://registry.identifiers.org/registry/pubchem.compound#!)? I would propose we check the MIRIAM registry and relax the allowed characters in keywords to at least allow dashes and dots.

## Specification

The syntax is similar to other namespace and annotation definitions. For namespaces, it looks like:

`DEFINE NAMESPACE <keyword> AS MIRIAM`

For annotations, it would look like:

`DEFINE ANNOTATION <keyword> AS MIRIAM`

## Backwards Compatibility

No issues with backwards compatibility.

## Reference Implementation

TBD
