# Add Equivalence Relation

## Abstract

The purpose of this BEP is to add an explicit equivalence relation (`equivalentTo`/`eq`) to the BEL language 
for scenarios when equivalence is solely because of the identifier/function pair (e.g., `g(HGNC:AKT1) eq g(ENTREZ:207)`)
and more complicated scenarios (e.g., `a(CHEBI:"amyloid-beta polypeptide 40") eq p(HGNC:APP, frag(672_711))`).

## Preamble

BEP-Id: BEP-0004

Status: Draft

Version: 1

BEL-Version: 2.0.0+

Authors: Charlie Hoyt (charles.hoyt@scai.fraunhofer.de)

Created-Date: 2018-07-13

Type: Standards Track

## Rationale and Goals

While the equivalencing system from the BEL Framework allowed identifiers to be considered as equivalent, 
it was not explicitly part of the language. Adding an equivalence relationship will have the goal of 
explicitly representing that two entities are equivalent, whether that equivalence is sufficiently captured 
by the combination of an identifier/function pair, or also the addition of modifiers.

## Use Cases

Case 1: Simple correspondence between two identifiers for the same gene:

```
g(HGNC:AKT1) eq g(ENTREZ:207)
```

It is not enough to show that HGNC:AKT1 is equivalent to ENTREZ:207, since both identifiers can be used with a `geneAbundance()`, `rnaAbundance()`, or `proteinAbundance()`.

Case 2: Complex definitions of equivalence

`a(CHEBI:"amyloid-beta polypeptide 40") eq p(HGNC:APP, frag(672_711))`

Several modifications of proteins and other physical entities have more commonly used names, and it might even be the case that 
they have different abundances as in this example.

From dbSNP: `g(HGNC:MDGA2, var(c.*1638C>A)) equivalentTo g(dbSNP:rs1235)`

## Discussion

- Is this a good name for the equivalance relation? Does it mirror the concept from RDF well enough, or is even considering the semantics of RDF equivalence confuse the reader?

## Specification

The equivalnce relation will be used as any other predicate, where any BEL term can be used as the subject and object.

`<BEL term 1> eq <BEL term 2>`

As expected, equivalence is a two-way relation where `A eq B` implies `B eq A`, and visa-versa.

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposed feature is for 2.0.0+ and will be added to the language so does not require any efforts to migrate older BEL knowledge.
